---
sutra: स्वरितञितः कर्त्रभिप्राये क्रियाफले
vRtti: स्वरितेतो ये धातवो ञितश्च तेभ्य आत्मनेपदं भवति कर्त्तारं चेत् क्रियाफलमभिप्रैति ॥
vRtti_eng: After the verb marked with a _svarita_, (_svaritet_) or which has an indicatory _n_ (_nit_), the terminations of the _Atmanepada_ are employed, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent.

---
The _anuvritti_ of the phrase णेः does not go further. The word क्रियाफलं is a compound, meaning 'fruit of the action.' When the principal object for the sake of which the action is begun, is meant for the agent indicated by the verb, there the _atmanepada_ is used after verbs having an indicatory ञ or a _svarita_ accent. As यजते 'he sacrifices for himself'; पचते 'he cooks for himself.' Here the verb यज् and पच् are marked with _svarita_ accent in the _Dhatupatha_, and therefore they take the _atmanepada_ terminations.

Similarly सुनुते 'he presses the _soma_-juice,' कुरुते 'he does.' Here the verbs सुञ् and कृञ् have an indicatory ञ्.

In all the above cases, the principal object of the action such as getting heaven by performance of sacrifices, eating of food, &c., is meant for the agent. That is to say, he sacrifices in order that he himself may attain heaven, he cooks in order that he himself may eat, &c.

Why do we say 'when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent'? Otherwise it will have _parasmaipada_. As यजन्ति याजकाः 'the priests sacrifice, (not for themselves, but for their clients)' पचन्ति पाचकाः 'the cooks cook (for their masters)'; कुर्वन्ति कर्मकराः 'the menials work (for their masters).' Here though the fees and the wages are the fruits which the agent gets, yet as that fruit is not the principal object for which the action was begun--the principal object of the sacrifice was not that the priest should get his fee, but that the sacrificer may go to heaven--the verb takes the terminations of the _Parasmaipada_. Here the principal fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, but to a third party.