---
sutra: अणावकर्म्मकाच्चित्तवत् कर्त्तृकात्
vRtti: अण्यन्तो यो धातुरकर्मकश्चित्तवत्कर्तृकश्चतस्माद्ण्यन्तात् परस्मैपदं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: The affixes of the _parasmaipada_ are employed after the causal of that verb, which in its non-causal state was intransitive and had a being endowed with reason for its agent; even when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent.

---
The phrase णेः is understood here also. The _Atmanepada_ was ordained by _sutra_ (I.3.74) when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This aphorism is an exception to that, and ordains _parasmaipada_. As आस्ते देवदत्तः _Devadatta_ sits; आसयते देवदत्तं he makes _Devadatta_ to sit; शेते देवदत्तः _Devadatta_ sleeps ; शाययति देवदत्तं he causes _Devadatta_ to lie down.

Why do we say 'in its non-causal state'? For if the causative root is from another causative root, and not from a simple non-causative root, then the _parasmaipada_ will not be employed. Thus 'if one person such as _Devadatta_, causes another person _Yajnadatta_, to cause a third person _Ramadatta_, to do an act denoted by an intransitive root, as 'mounting' for instance, though _Ramadatta_ mounts for his own benefit, the verb to be used in such a case is आरोहयते, in the _Atmanepada_, from the root  आरुह to mount; and not आरोहयति. (_Lengar_'s Guide to _Panini_).

Why do we say 'which was intransitive'? This rule will not apply if the verb in its non-causative state was transitive. Thus from कारि the causative from कृ, if the person caused to do the act denoted by the verb does it for his own use, comes only कारयते though the person has a will; for the original root कृ though a non-causative root, is not an intransitive root.' (Ibid).

Why do we say 'having a being endowed with reason for its agent'? For if the agent is a non-sentient object, the verb will be _Atmanepadi_. Thus from शोषि the causative from शुष 'to dry' if that which dries is a thing not possessed of a will as व्रीहयः 'paddy,' for instance, though the fruit of the action, i.e., the drying, affects only the paddy itself, comes शोषयते in the _atmanepadi_, though 'to dry' is an intransitive root; e. g., शोषयते व्रीहीनातपः 'the sun-shine causes the paddy to dry.' (Ibid).  