---
sutra: उपदेशेऽजनुनासिक इत्
vRtti: उपविश्यतेऽनेनेति उपदेशः, शास्त्रवाक्यानि सूत्रपाठः खिलपाठश्च तत्र योऽजनुनासिकः स इत्संज्ञो भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: The nasalized vowels are इत् in _Upadesa_, or original enunciation.

---
_Anunasika_ or nasalized vowels are इत् that is indicatory, when occurring in technical words. Thus in क्विन्, विद्, विच् the _anunasika_ इ is इत्. The original _sutra_ contains the word '_upadesa_' which we have translated as technical term. '_Upadesa_' literally means 'instruction' or the first mentioning of a thing either in a _sutrapatha_, or _ganapatha_, or _dhatu_ _patha_, &c.

From this _sutra_ up to _sutra_ (I.3.9), there is a description of servile or indicatory letters called इत्. "In _Panini_'s Grammar there is no visible sign of the nasality of a vowel -- hence we can know a vowel to be nasalized only from _Panini_'s explicitly asserting that it is so, or from our finding that he treats it in such a way that we must conclude he regarded it as nasal." An _upadesa_ is defined as signifying an original enunciation, that is to say, an affix (_pratyaya_), or an augment (_agama_), or a verbal root (_dhatu_), or in short, any form of expression which occurs only in technical treatises of grammar, and which is not a word ready for use, but one of the supposed original elements of a word. Thus in the root एध 'to increase,' the final अ is indicatory, the real root is एध्. So also the final अ of स्पर्द्ध is इत् ॥

If the word is not an _upadesa_, then the nasal vowel is not इत् ॥ As अभ्र आं अपः ॥ A word may be an _upadesa_, and nasal, but if it is not a vowel, it need not be इत् as the affix मनिन् in _sutra_ (III.2.74). (आतो मनिन् क्वनिब् वनिपश्च) It is only the nasal vowel of an _upadesa_ that becomes इत् and not all the vowels. The word इत् occurs in _sutras_ (V.2.16). (आदितश्च &c.).