---
sutra: लः कर्मणि च भावे चाकर्मकेभ्यः
vRtti: लकाराः कर्मणिकारके भवन्ति, चकारात् कर्तरि च, अकर्मकेभ्यो धातुभ्यो भावे भवन्ति, पुनश्चकारात् कर्तरि च ॥
vRtti_eng: The tense-affixes called \"_la_\" are used in denoting the object and the agent; and after intransitive verbs, they denote the action as well as the agent.

---
The term ल् means the ten affixes known as लट्, लिट्, &c; ल् is the common element of them all; and these affixes, when stripped of all indicatory letters, leave behind only the letter ल् which is thus common name for them all. The लः in the _sutra_, is the nominative plural of ल् । By the word च in the _sutra_, we draw in the word कर्ता or 'agent' from the last _sutra_ into this. The force of these tense-affixes, when placed after transitive verbs is to denote the object and the agent; and when placed after intransitive verbs, is to denote either 'action' (भाव) or it may denote the 'agent'.

The verb itself denotes the action; to be or to do, generally; or to be or to do, in a particular manner. In the active voice the affix marks the agent; in the passive voice of a transitive verb, it marks the object; but in the passive form of an intransitive verb, the action itself. Thus, गम्यते ग्रामो देवदत्तेन 'the village is gone to by _Devadatta_'; here ते of गम्यते denotes the object and is in passive construction. गच्छति ग्रामं देवदत्तः '_Devadatta_ goes to the village'; here the affix ति of गच्छति denotes the agent, and the sentence is in active construction. The verb गम् being a transitive verb, can take both the active and passive constructions or, to use the Sanskrit technical phraseology, the tense affixes, after transitive verbs, denote the agent and the object. They can never denote भाव or action after transitive verbs, that is, transitive verbs cannot be used impersonally. Let us now give examples of Intransitive verbs; आस्यते देवदत्तेन 'it is seated by _Devadatta_'; the verb आस्यते here denotes merely भाव or 'action'. In other words, we may call this an impersonal construction. आस्ते देवदत्तः '_Devadatta_ sits'; here the verb आस्ते denotes the agent or is in the active voice.

Professor Bohtlingk translates the _sutra_ thus:- "A finite verb expresses the agent as well as the object; but the Intransitive verbs denote, in addition to that, the Impersonal idea of the action". The word भाव means action considered in the abstract.