---
sutra: यस्मात् प्रत्ययविधिस्तदादि प्रत्यये ऽङ्गम्
vRtti: यस्मात् प्रत्ययो विधीयते धातोर्वा प्रातिपदिकाद्वा तदादि शब्दरूपं प्रत्यये परतोऽङ्गसंज्ञं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: After whatsoever there is an affix enjoined, whether verbal root or crude-form, that which begins therewith in the form in which it appears when the affix follows it, is called an Inflective base (_anga_).
---
The words of this _sutra_ require some explanation. _Yasmat_ after whatsoever; _pratyaya_-_vidhih_ compound of _pratyaya_ meaning an affix and _vidhih_, a precept i.e. a rule enjoying an affix; _tadadi_, I. S. that which begins therewith _pratyaye_ 7. S. = in a _pratyaya_ i.e. when a _pratyaya_ follows (1. 1.) is called a base.

After whatsoever there is an affix enjoined, whether it be a verbal root (_Dhatu_) or a nominal base (_pratipadika_), the word-form having that as its beginning, is called an _anga_, with regard to the affix that follows. The word _yasmat_ is used in the aphorism to point out the thing named, as _anga_; because the word _tadadi_ follows it. This defines the word _anga_. The word 'base' is thus a relative term with regard to its affix. Thus कृ + ता = कर्ता he will do हर्ता he will lose. करिष्यति, हरिष्यति. Here because the root कृ and हृ gets the name अंग they are _gunated_ by (VII. 3. 84). Similarly because उपगु &c. get the name _Anga_, their vowel is _vriddhied_ in औपगवः &c.

The words _kri_ _hri_ are _anga_ with regard to the affix _ta_ &c. उपगु + अण् = औपगवः; कापटवः. Here _upagu_ and _kapatu_ are _anga_ with regard to _an_. Similarly कृ + स्य + वः = करिष्य + वः = करिष्यावः. Here the whole word form _Karishya_ is regarded as _anga_, and as such the short _a_ is lengthened by (VII. 3. 101); because though the affix _vah_ is enjoined after the word _kri_, the form which begins with _kri_ i.e. _karishya_ will also be called _anga_ when the affix is to be added. The word _tadadi_, therefore, has been used in the _sutra_, to make the definition of _Anga_ applicable to the forms which a word may assume after taking the intermediate affixes like _sya_ &c., or नुम् before the final affixes. Thus कुण्ड + नुम् + इ = कुण्डन् + इ = कुण्डानि (VII. 1. 72) and (VI. 4. 8) _kunda_ + _num_ + _i_ = _kundan_ +_i_  = _kundani_, bowls. Here the whole form _kundan_ is called _anga_, and as such it lengthens its vowel before the case-affix _i_ by (VI. 4. 8).

Why have we used the word _pratyaya_? Without it the rule would have run thus :- 'After whatever there is anything enjoined &c., is called _Anga_.' Then in स्त्री + इयती = स्त्रयती. Here _sandhi_ of vowels is enjoined between ई + इ = ई. If स्त्री was here an _Anga_, then its last last vowel would have been replaced by इयङ् (VI. 4. 77), the form being स्त्रियियति.

Why have we used the word विधि ? Had we omitted it the rule would have run thus:-- "After whatsoever there is an affix, whether root or _pratipadika_ is _Anga_." Thus in दधि अधुना, though the affix _adhuna_ is placed after the word _dadhi_, it is not enjoined by any rule, and the word दधि is not called _anga_. Had it been so called, then the इ of _dadhi_ should have been elided by rule (VI. 4. 148).

The word _pratyaya_ has been repeated twice in this _sutra_ in order to show that when an affix is elided, the term _anga_ will not apply to what stood before it. Thus in the compound word स्त्रियै + अर्थं = स्त्र्यर्थं for the sake of the woman. Here in forming the _Tatpurusha_ compound the dative case-affix after the word स्त्री has been elided, for as a general rule case-affixes are elided in forming compounds. If the word स्त्री after its affix had been elided, still retained its old designation of _Anga_, the स्त्री + अर्थं would have been स्त्रियर्थं, the augment _iyan_ being added by the rule already referred to above.
