---
sutra: कर्तुरीप्सिततमं कर्म
vRtti: कर्त्तुः क्रियया यदाप्तुमिष्टतमं तत्कारकं कर्मसंज्ञं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: "(_KARMA_). That which it is intended should be most affected by the of the agent is called the object or _karma_."
---
That which is especially desired by the agent to be accomplished by the action is called _karma_. As कटं करोति He makes the mat. ग्रामं गच्छति he goes to the village. Why do we say "desired by the agent"? Observe माषेष्व श्वं बध्नाति he ties the horse in the gram field. Here gram is no doubt most desired by the horse, but as the horse is not the agent of the verb, the word माष takes the locative case. Why do we use the word "most"? Observe पयसौदनं भुङ्क्ते he eats the food along with the milk. Here milk is me doubt desired by the agent, but not being the principal object desired, takes the Instrumental case.

Though the word कर्म was understood in this _sutra_ by _anuvritti_ from the last _sutra_, the repetition of this word here is to indicate that the _anuvritti_ of the word _adhara_ does not extend to this _sutra_, because as we do not take the _anuvritti_ of the word _karma_ into this _sutra_, we do not take the _anuvritti_ of any word of the previous _sutra_ into this. Had we taken the _anuvritti_ of the word _karma_ from the last _sutra_, then we could use the accusative case in those limited instances, where the word is capable of taking the Locative case also, but not in other cases. Thus while we could very well say गेहं प्रविशति he enters the house, we could not say ओदनं पचति he cooks the food, सक्तुं पिबति he drinks _saktu_. By repeating the word _karma_ in this _sutra_, such examples become valid everywhere. The _karma_-_karaka_, takes the second case-affix.
