---
sutra: शेषात् कर्तरि परस्मैपदम्
vRtti: शेषात्कर्तरिपरस्मैपदं भवति शेषादेवनान्यस्मात् अनुदात्तङित आत्मनेपदमुक्तम् ॥
vRtti_eng: After the rest, i.e. after all those verbs not falling under any one of the previous provisions, the terminations of the _parasmaipada_ are employed in marking the agent (i.e. in the active voice).

---
The rules of _Atmanepada_ have been declared in the preceding 66 _sutras_, (1.3.12) to (1.3.77). The terminations of the _Parasmaipada_, which are the general verbal terminations, will come everywhere else, that is to say, where its operation is not debarred by any one of the preceding aphorisms. The present _sutra_ declares this universal rule. The word _sesha_ or the rest, means that which is the residue after the application of all the previous restrictive rules. Thus it was declared by _sutra_ (1.3.12) _ante_ that a root having an _Anudatta_ vowel or a ङ as _it_, will take _Atmanepada_ termisations. As आस्ते शेते. The converse of this will take _parasmaipada_ terminations, namely all verbs which do not have an _anudatta_ accent or a ङ as _it_. Thus याति 'he goes,' वाति 'it blows.' It has been declared by _sutra_ (1.3.17) that the root विश when preceded by नि takes _Atmanepada_ terminations, as निविशते. When not preceded by नि but any other preposition, it will take the _parasmaipada_ termination. As आविशति, प्रविशति.

Why do we say "when marking the agent"? For when used in the passive voice the root will take the _Atmanepada_ termination. As पच्यते 'it is cooked', गम्यते 'it is gone.'

Why is not _parasmaipada_ used when the verb is employed reflexively ? As in the following example :- पच्यते ओदनः स्वयमेव 'the food cooks of itself.' Because in the present _sutra_ the word कर्तरि of _sutra_ (1.3.14) _ante_ is to be read in by _anuvritti_, so that, in fact there are two कर्तरि in this aphorism which thus means "when the agent of the verb is an agent pure and simple then _parasmaipada_ is employed." While when a verb is used reflexively (कर्म्मकर्तरि) the agent of the verb is also, in one aspect, the object of the verb; and it is therefore, that in reflexive verbs the _Atmanepada_ terminations are employed.