---
sutra: आम्प्रत्ययवत्कृञोऽनुप्रयोगस्य
vRtti: आम्प्रत्ययस्थेवधातोः कृञोऽनुप्रयोगस्यात्मनेपदं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: Like the verb that takes the affix _am_, if the verb be conjugated with the _Atmanepada_ terminations, so of the verb _kri_ when subjoined thereto as an auxiliary, the terminations are of the _Atmanepada_, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent.

---
This _sutra_ applies where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. There are in Sanskrit two forms of the perfect tense (लिट्): one formed in the ordinary way by the reduplication of the root and adding the terminations; the other called the periphrastic perfect, is formed by adding आम् to the root, and then affixing to it the perfect tense of the roots कृ (to do), भू (to be ) or अस् ( to be ). These latter verbs are called _anuprayoga_ or auxiliary verbs, as it is with their help that the perfect tense is formed. The question then arises, what conjugation, _parasmai_ or _atmanepada_, do these auxiliaries take in forming the periphrastic perfect? This _sutra_ supplies the answer :--the auxiliary कृ follows the conjugation of principals, the other auxiliaries do not. Thus the root एध (to increase, prosper) is _atmanepadi_, therefore in forming the periphrastic perfect, the verb कृ will be also in the _atmanepada_. Thus एधांचक्रे (he prospered). Similarly इद् (to appear with great splendour) is _parasmaipadi_ and the auxiliary कृ after it will be _parasmaipada_, as इन्दाञ्चकार (he appeared with great splendour).
.
But the other auxiliaries भू and अस् retain their own peculiar conjugation and are not influenced by the conjugation of their principal. Thus एधाम्बभूव, एधामास.

The word _am_-_pratyaya_ of the _sutra_ means 'that after which the affix _am_ (3.1.35) and (3.1.36.) (कास्प्रत्ययादाममन्त्रे लिटि) comes.' Of the verb _krin_, when subjoined to another as an auxiliary, the termination is that of the _atmanepada_ like the verb that takes the affix _am_. If this _sutra_ enjoined a rule of injunction (_vidhi_), then there would be the termination of the _atmanepada_ even in examples like उदब्जांचकार and उदम्भांचकार where the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. This is no valid objection to the present _sutra_. It is to be interpreted in both ways, that is, both as a _vidhi_ (a general injunction) and a _niyama_ (a restrictive injunction). How is that to be done? Because the word _purvavat_ of the last _sutra_ is to be read in the present aphorism also. The second explanation in that case will be for the sake of establishing a _niyama_ or restrictive rule.

It has already been said above that the auxiliary verbs कृ, भू and अस् are used in forming the periphrastic perfect. This is done by force of the aphorism (3.1.40), कृञ्चानुप्रयुज्यते लिटि, meaning, the verb _krin_ is annexed in the perfect tense, to verbs, that take _am_. In this _sutra_ (3.1.40) the word _krin_ is a _pratyahara_, implying the verbs कृङ्, भू and अस्. It might be asked how is this _pratyahara_ formed? The word _kri_ is taken from the fourth word of _sutra_ (5.4.50), अभूतद्भावे कृभ्वस्तियोगे &c., and the letter _n_ is taken from _sutra_ (5.4.58) कृञोद्वितीय &c. This is the way in which the commentators explain how not only the verb _krin_ is used as an auxiliary in forming the periphrastic perfect, but also the verbs भू and अस्. These three verbs denoting absolute action unmodified by any especial condition have in all languages been fixed upon as the best auxiliaries.

It must, however, be noted that the word _krin_ in this _sutra_ is not used as a _pratyahara_ and consequently does not include the verbs भू and अस्.