---
sutra: वाक्यस्य टेः प्लुत उदात्तः
vRtti: वाक्यस्य टेरिति प्लुत इति च उदात्त इति च एतत्रयमप्यधिकृतं वेदितव्यमापादपरिसमाप्ते, र्यदित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामो वाक्यस्य टेः प्लुत उदात्त इत्येवं तद्वेदितव्यम् ॥
vRtti_eng: 'Upto the close of this chapter (_Pada_), is always to be supplied : ''the last vowel of a sentence is _pluta_ and has the acute''.'

---
This is an _adhikara_ _sutra_. All the three words i.e. "the last vowel (टि) of a sentence", "_pluta_" and "acute" - are to be supplied in the subsequent aphorisms to complete the sense, upto the end of this _Pada_. Whatever we shall treat hereafter will refer to the final vowel (टि) in a sentence, and it will get the _pluta_ lengthening and acute accent. Thus (VIII.2.83), says "In answer to a salutation, but not when it is addressed to a _Sudra_". We must supply the present aphorism to complete the meaning :-"In answer to a salutation, the last vowel of a sentence becomes _pluta_ and gets the acute accent, but not when it is addressed to a _Sudra_". As अभिवादये देवदत्तोऽहं । भो आयुष्मानेधि देवदत्ता꣡ ३ ॥

One _adhikara_ sets aside another _adhikara_, this is the general maxim. Will therefore the _adhikara_ of the present aphorism set aside the _adhikara_ of the word पदस्य (VIII.1.16)? No, the _adhikara_ of पदस्य has not ceased, though latent. Otherwise in भवन्तौ &c. the न् would be required to be changed to रु by (VIII.3.7). But it does not become so, because पदस्य manifests itself there.

The employment of the word "_vakya_" would not debar the _anuvritti_ of पद, for the final vowel of a sentence, will a fortiori be the final vowel of a word (_pada_), then what is the use of employing the word वाक्यस्य in this _sutra_ ?

The word वाक्य is employed in the _sutra_, so that a word which is not the last word of a sentence, will not get the _pluta_ and acute. Had the _sutra_ been पदस्य टेः &c. then all the words of a sentence would become _pluta_ and acute in the final. The word टि is employed to indicate that the final vowel becomes _pluta_ and acute, though the word may end in a consonant. As अग्निचि꣡३त् ॥ Had टि not been used, the rule would have applied to words ending in vowels only, and not to words ending in consonants.