---
sutra: हलादिः शेषः
vRtti: अभ्यासस्य हलादिः शिष्यते अनादिर्लुप्यते ॥
vRtti_eng: "Of the consonants of the reduplicate, only the first is retained, the remainders are dropped."
---
As जग्लौ, मम्लौ, पपाच, पपाठ, आट, आटतुः, आटुः ॥ This rule ordains the retention of the initial consonant, if any, and elision of the non-initials in the reduplicate. If the root begins with a vowel as अट्, there being no initial consonant, in अट् अट्, the ट् will be elided of course. The word हलादिः should not be construed as a Genitive _Tatpurusha_ 'first among the consonants', for then in अक्ष् + लिट् = अक्ष् अक्ष्, the ष् only would be elided, and क् retained.

The word शेषः or शिष्यते here means अवस्थाप्यते 'is retained'. The word हलादिः is not a compound. For had it been a compound, then if it is a _Karmadharaya_, the word आदिः should stand first ; if it be a Genitive compound then the first among compound consonants would be retained and we could not get the form आनक्ष from अक्ष. The word _abhyasa_ is to be taken in the sense of _jati_ or kind, i.e. in the _jati_ which is collectively called _abhyasa_, the consonant that stands first in respect to _abhyasa_, is retained, and not the consonant standing in any other portion of it. So that all consonants, where ever they may be situated in the body of an _abhyasa_, whether in the beginning or middle or end, are dropped, except one with which the _abhyasa_ begins. Thus if the _abhyasa_ begins with a simple consonant, it is retained; if it begins with a conjunct consonant, the first is only retained; and if the consonant or consonants are not in the beginning they are all dropped.

Others say, the word शेषः here means "retention along with the cessation of others". Therefore, though literally the word शेषः or retention appears to be the principal word in this _sutra_, yet as a matter of fact, it is secondary, because the injunction is not with regard to retention, but with regard to cessation. The rule is not "Retain the first consonant"; but "Drop every consonant but the first, is there be a first consonant". Or the _sutras_ 59 and 60, may be combined and read thus : ह्रस्वोऽहल् "The _abhyasa_ becomes short and also without consonant". आदिशेषः "The first consonant is retained". Or the _sutras_ may be divided thus :-

(1) 'A short vowel is substituted in the _abhyasa_'.

(2) 'The consonants of _abhyasa_ are all elided'.

(3) The first is retained.

The _sutras_ 59 and 60 must be joined by _sandhi_ "ह्रस्वोऽहलादिशेषः", and then we shall be able to read an elided अ between ह्रस्वः and हल्, as if it was a compound of ह्रस्व and अहल् ॥
