---
sutra: वृद्धो यूना तल्लक्षणश्चेदेव विशेषः
vRtti: वृद्धोयूनासहवचनेशिष्यते युवानिवर्त्तते तल्लक्षणञ्चेदेव विशेषः ॥
vRtti_eng: The _vriddha_ (or patronymic _Gotra_ word becomes _ekasesha_, and is retained, when compounded) with a patronymic word called _yuvan_, provided that the specific difference in form between them be in their signs (affix) only.

---
The word _sesha_ of the previous _sutra_ is understood here. The word "_yuna_" in the text is in the instrumental case. The _yuvan_ word is dropped when read along with a _Vriddha_ word. The word _Vriddha_ means _gotra_: the old _acharyas_ (grammarians) used the word _Vriddha_ for _gotra_. The _vriddha_ (or in other words, the gotra) word designates a person between whom and original head of the family a son (or a word formed by an _apatya_ affix) intervenes. In using together two words, one formed by a _gotra_ affix and the other by a _yuvan_ affix, the _Vriddha_ is retained, where the difference between those words is in their affixes only. These two words, _gotra_ and _yuvan_, are defined in _sutras_ (IV.1.162) and (IV.1.163). (अपत्यं पौत्रप्रभृति गोत्रम् ॥ जीवति तु वंश्ये युवा) ॥ Roughly speaking a _gotra_ word is formed from the original noun which is the name of the head of the family when a son of such person is living; and a _vriddha_ word represents thus a grandson, or lower than that, but not a son; while a _yuvan_ word is derived from such last mentioned _gotra_ word by another affix and thus represents persons lower than grandsons.

The word '_tad_' in the _sutra_ refers to the _gotra_ and _yuvan_ affixes. The word _lakshana_ 'sign' in the _sutra_ is synonymous with 'cause' or 'occasion'; meaning the specific difference is caused or occasioned by the _gotra_ and _yuvan_ affixes. The word चेत् in the _sutra_ means 'if.' The word एव 'only' is used to exclude others. The word विशेषः in the _sutra_ means the 'dissimilarity of form.'

Thus गार्ग्यः + गार्ग्यायणः = गार्ग्यौ. Here the first word denotes a clan called _Gargya_ (the offspring or grandsons of _Garga_ formed by the affix यञ् (IV. I. 105) \[1\] the second word denotes a younger branch of the same, and is formed by the _Taddhita_ affix denoting a secondary derivative \[2\]. In this then, the first or "_Vriddha_" remains; the second or the _yuvan_ is dropped; and the form "_Gargyau_" means both the old and the new clan. Similarly वात्स्यः + वात्स्यायनः = वात्स्यौ ॥

This _Ekasesha_ is to be done only in those cases, where the two words have the same radical form, the only difference between them being in their derivative formation.

The words must differ only by their affixes, but their radical element must be the same. The rule therefore does not apply to:- गार्ग्यः (a _Vriddha_ word + वात्स्यायनः (a _yuvan_ word) = गार्ग्यवात्स्यायनौ ॥

This rule of _ekasesha_ does not apply if one of the words be not a _Vriddha_ word. Thus गर्गः + गार्ग्यायणः = गर्गगार्ग्यायणौ ॥

Similarly vice versa गार्ग्यः + गर्गः = गार्ग्यगर्गौ । Here the one word is _Vriddha_, but the other is not _yuvan_.

The word "only" is used in the _sutra_ in an exclusive sense, the force being, that two words may stand in the relation of _Vriddha_ and _yuvan_, their radical element, i.e. form may be the same; but if the secondary word has another sense over and above the sense of a _yuvan_ affix, this rule is not applicable. Thus rule (IV.1.148) \[3\] says a "_Vriddha_ word may optionally take the affix ठक् to form a _yuvan_ word and to indicate contempt and born in the country of _Sauvira_." Thus भागवित्तिः + भागवित्तिकः = भागवित्तिभागवित्तिकौ. Here the second word, though a _yuvan_ word, connotes the additional sense of contempt and degradation. The affix ठक् is not merely a _yuvan_ affix but conveys the other sense also, the pure _yuvan_ word being भागवित्तायनः.

N. B.- The system of domestic economy among the ancient _Aryas_ was considerably difterent from the prevalent one. The surnames or the _gotras_ represented the patriarchal system. Three forms of surnames are constantly met with in ancient literature. The first was most important: it was the patronymic by which the lord of the united family, the patriarch, was known. For example, _Garga_ or _Gargacharya_ was the recognised head of all the _Gargas_ who may be a hundred. His eldest son and heir was called _Gargi_. This is the first form of the patronymic (_apatya_). The grandsons or sons of _Gargi_ were named _Gargyas_ (_Vriddham_ or _Gotra_). On the decease of the old patriarch, _Gargi_ began to be called _Garga_; and the eldest of the grandsons was called _Gargi_; and those great-grandsons who belonged to the family, and were designated _Gargayanas_ (_yuvan_) were now called _Gargyas_.

## Footnotes
- [1] - गर्गादिभ्यो यञ् ॥
- [2] - यञिञोश्च ॥
- [3] – वृद्धाट्ठक्सौवीरेषु बहुलम् ॥