---
sutra: तिष्यपुनर्वस्वोर्नक्षत्रद्वन्द्वे बहुवचनस्य द्विवचनं नित्यम्
vRtti: तिष्यपुनर्वस्वोर्नक्षत्रविषयेद्वन्द्वे बहुवचनप्रसङ्गे निन्यं द्विवचनं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: "In the _Dvandva_ compounds of the stars _Tishya_ and _Punarvasu_, the dual constantly comes in the place of the plural."
---
When there is a collective compounding of the words _Tishya_ and _Punarvasu_ (meaning two groups of stars), the final compound is always in the dual. Thus उदितौ तिष्यपुनर्वसूदृश्येते 'the _Tishya_ and _Punarvasu_ having risen are seen (dual).'

There is one star called _Tishya_; and there are two stars called _Punarvasu_. As the _Dvandva_ compound of these stars refers to more than two stars, it ought to have been in the plural number. This rule teaches that there should be a dual number, where otherwise there would have been a plural number. Why do we say '_Tishya_' and '_Punarvasu_'? Observe विशाखानुराधाः 'the stars _Visakha_ and _Anuradha_.' The compound is in plural number.

This rule would not apply if these words do not connote stars but are used in any other sense. As तिष्यपुनर्वसवो माणवकाः, 'Boys called _Tishya_ and _Punarvasus_.'

Why is the word 'star' repeated in the _sutra_, when the previous _sutras_ and the context show that stars were being treated of. The repetition is for the sake of including the synonyms of _Tishya_ and _Punarvasu_. As तिष्यपुनर्वसू; पुष्यपुनर्वसू, सिद्धपुनर्वसू ॥

The rule only applies when these words form a _Dvandva_ compound, and not when they are compounded in any other way. Thus तिष्यपुनर्वसवः is an example of _Bahuvrihi_ compound meaning "persons who confound the _Tishya_ with the _Punarvasu_."

The rule only applies to the plural _Dvandva_. If the _Dvandva_ takes the singular termination, this rule has no application. As तिष्यपुनर्वसू इदमिति.

This _sutra_ indicates by implication (_jnapaka_) that "every _Dvandva_ compound may optionally take the terminations of the singular" for otherwise the employment of the term बहुवचनस्य in the _sutra_ would be superfluous.

The word 'always' has been used in the text to show that the governing power of "option" stops here with this _sutra_ and does not extend to it or any further.
