---
sutra: प्रधानप्रत्ययार्थवचनमर्थस्यान्यप्रमाणत्वात्
vRtti: प्रधानं समासे किंचित्पदं प्रत्ययस्तव्यदादिः ताभ्यामर्थवचनमर्थाभिधानमनेन प्रकारेण भवतीति पूर्वाचार्य्यैः परिभाषितम् प्रधानोपसर्ज्जने प्रधानार्थेसहब्रूतः प्रकृति प्रत्ययौसहार्थे ब्रूत इति । तत् पाणिनिराचार्य्यः प्रत्याचष्टे अशिष्यमेतत् अर्थस्यान्यप्रमाणत्वादिति । अन्य इति शास्त्रापेक्षया लोकोव्यपदिश्यते, शब्दैरर्थाभिधानं स्वाभाविकं न पारिभाषिकमशक्यत्वात् । लोकत एवार्थावगतेः ॥
vRtti_eng: (Nor need be taught) the rule relating to the dependence of the meaning of a word on the principal (_pradhana_, in a compound) or on the affix (_pratyaya_), because the authority of the meaning (of a word, compound or derivative) consists in something else.
---
This _sutra_ may be divided into two parts. The first part stating the proposition and ending with the word _vachanam_. The second part giving the reason. The first part consists of four words; _Pradhana_: 'Principal in a compound.' As in the compound राजपुरुषः 'king's man,' the word _raja_ is _Upasarjana_; and पुरुषः is _pradhana_. 2. _Pratyaya_: 'affix.' 3. 'meaning.' 4. वचनम् 'word or sentence.'

In the time of _Panini_, there were some grammarians who held the opinion, that the meaning of a word is determined, if a compound word, then by its principal word; and if a derivative word, then by the suffix. _Panini_ controverts this opinion by declaring that in as much as the meaning of a word is fixed by usage and idiom, therefore the proofs for the meaning of a word are not to be searched either in the affixes which go to form it; or by its principal word, if it is a compound. Because, says _Panini_, the proof of the meaning of a word is in something else, that is to say in the usage of a people and not in the suffixes, &c. A person who has never heard the name of grammar, understands full well when told to bring a _Raja_-_purusha_. He brings an official and not a king, nor even any person in general. Similarly when told to bring an औपगव he brings a cowherd's child, not a cowherd, nor a child in general, nor both. When, therefore, the sense of a word is determined by usage, there is no use to strive to find out the sense by grammatical rules.
