---
sutra: अर्थवदधातुरप्रत्ययः प्रातिपदिकम्
vRtti: अर्थवच्छब्दरूपं प्रातिपदिकसंज्ञं भवति धातुप्रत्ययौ वर्जयित्वा ॥
vRtti_eng: "A significant form of a word, not being a verbal root (_dhatu_), or an affix (_pratyaya_) is called a _pratipadika_ or crude-form."
---
This defines the word "_pratipadika_" or crude-form. The _pratipadika_ is the intermediate stage in the development of a full word (_pada_), from the undifferentiated ore called the _dhatu_ or root. It is that part of a word which is capable of receiving the case-terminations.

The word अर्थ means having signification. With the exception of verbal roots and affixes, a word-form having a significance or meaning is called a _pratipadika_, as डित्थः 'a wooden elephant,' कपित्थ 'the wood-apple tree,' कुण्डम् 'a bowl,' पीठम् 'a seat.':

Why do we say "significant"? Of course it must have some meaning. Thus of the word वनं, we cannot say that the portion वन् is _pratipadika_; as it has no meaning, and had it been a _pratipadika_, the final न् would have been dropped by Rule (VIII. 2. 7) \[1\] (the final न् of a _pratipadika_ is dropped).

The word must not be a verb, as the word अहन् (the third person sing. number, imperfect tense of हन्) he killed. Had it been a _pratipadika_, the न् would have been dropped.

The word must not be an affix or ending in an affix:-as कुण्डे 'in the bowl.' Here the word ends in the affix इ of the locative case, and is consequently not a '_pratipadika_' or crude form, but a complete word. Had it been a _pratipadika_, the ए would have been shortened into इ by rule 47 succeeding.

A _nipata_ or particle though not a significant form of a word, yet gets the designation of _pratipadika_ in the opinion of the author of the _Mahabhashya_. As अध्यागच्छति, प्रलम्बते.

## Footnotes
- [1] - नलोपः प्रातिपदिकान्तस्य ॥
