---
sutra: कालोपसर्ज्जने च तुल्यम्
vRtti: कालोपसर्ज्जने चाशिष्ये कस्मादर्थस्यान्यप्रमाणत्वात् ॥
vRtti_eng: "And a rule fixing the meaning of Tense (_kala_) and _Upasarjana_ (sequence) is equally (unnecessary, and need not be taught)."
---
Here _Panini_ controverts the opinion of those grammarians who would even define time and sequence. Thus there were authors who defined pluperfect as a tense relating to time hundred years past, others said a thousand years past, &c. _Panini_ declares that these are redundant definitions and reprehensible, for the same reason as given in the previous _sutra_.

To give another example. Thus अद्यतनः कालः or the period of the current day, has been thus defined by some _Acharyas_:- "The period of time beginning from the point when one rises (or ought to rise) from his bed, according to the law, and ending with the point when one goes to bed, according to rule, is called _adyatana_." Others say "from midnight to midnight is the period of the current day." Similarly others have explained the '_upasarjana_' to mean "that which is not the principal word in a compound is called _upasarjana_." The sage _Panini_ has not thought it worth his while to define such word as _upasarjana_, in as much as their sense is well understood by all as a matter of usage. Thus common people who have never heard of grammar, also know the correct use of tenses; they say: "This is to be done by me to-day, this wiil be done by us to-morrow, this was done by us yesterday."

Similarly common people also know the use of the word _upasarjana_, for they say:- "वयमत्र गृहे ग्रामे वा उपसर्जनम्" 'we are secondary or unimportant persons in this house or village,' meaning that they are not the principal persons. Therefore that which is valid according to the usage of the people is needless to be taught.

Why was not this _sutra_ included in the last? What is the necessity of making a separate rule of this? The answer is that it is an illustrative _sutra_, and does not exhaust the subject. There are other rules made by former sages which are also not taught by _Panini_. Thus the following rules of old _Rishis_ are not taught herein, they being supposed to be well-known. "A _Bahuvrihi_ compound connotes ownership." "In _Dvanda_ compounds the sense of both the members of a compound are principal" "In _Avyayibhava_ compounds the sense of the prior word is the principal" &c.
