---
sutra: न लुमताङ्गस्य
vRtti: लुमता शब्देन लुप्ते प्रत्यये यदङ्गं तस्य प्रत्ययलक्षणं कार्यं न भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: Of the base (_anga_), whose affix has been elided by the use of any of the three words containing लु, the operations dependent on it do not take place, regarding such base.

---
This _sutra_ is a special exception to the previous aphorism which was too extensive. It declares, that when an affix is elided by using the words लुक्, श्लु, or लुप्, then the 'sign' or लक्षण or the peculiar virtue of the affix also vanishes. Thus there is an important difference in the elision of an affix by force of the words लुप् &c.; and by the word लोप. In one case the virtue of the affix subsists inspite of the elision, in the other it does not.

The word अङ्ग in this _sutra_ requires some explanation. "A root, followed by a suffix (_pratyaya_), is raised to the dignity of a base (_pratipadika_), and finally becomes a real word (_pada_) when it is finished by receiving a case-termination (_vibhakti_). Every base, with regard to the suffix which is attached to it, is called _Anga_, body."

Thus the word गर्गाः is the plural of the word गार्ग्यः. The word गार्ग्यः is formed by adding the affix यञ् to गर्ग (IV.1.105); the force of the indicatory ञ् being to cause the _vriddhi_ of the first vowel of the word (VII.2.117). But in forming the plural of गार्ग्य, rule (II.4.64) presents itself, which declares that there is _luk_ of the affix यञ् when the word takes the plural. Here the affix यञ् is elided by the word _luk_, which means not only the elision of the य of गार्ग्य but also the shortening of आ into अ, that is, the affix being elided, it vanishes altogether, leaving no trace behind, in the shape of the _vriddhing_ of the first vowel, which the affix was competent to cause.

Similarly सृष्टः is the 3rd per. dual present tense of सृज् 'to clean.' It belongs to _Adadi_ class in which the _vikarana_ शप् is elided by '_luk_' (II.4.72); and hence there is no _vriddhi_ substitution, which would have taken place by (VII.2.114), (the _ik_ of the base सृज् is _vriddhied_ before verbal affixes).

Similarly जुहुतः 'they two sacrifice'; here the _vikarana_ शप् has been elided by using the word '_slu_' ((II.4.75), let _slu_ be substituted in the room of _sap_ after the verbs _hu_&c). The effect of this elision is, that there is no _guna_ substitution of the vowel of the base, which शप् was competent to cause.

When an affix is elided in any other way than by the enunciation of the three terms containing लु, it is competent to cause its proper effect. Thus कृ + णिच् + यक् + ते = कारि + यक् + ते = कार् + यक् + ते = कार्यते. Here the elision of the affix _nich_ is by '_lopa_,' (VI.4.51) and hence though the affix vanishes, its effect remains. Why do we say 'in respect of an _Anga_ or inflective base?' Observe पञ्च 'five,' सप्त 'seven,' पयः 'milk,' साम '_sama_ _veda_.' Here in the word _pancha_, the plural case-affix is elided by (VII. I. 22) (after the words called _shat_, the जस् and शस् are elided by '_luk_'). Here the affix is elided by enouncing the word '_luk_,' the result is, that the affix cannot produce any change which it would otherwise have caused, in the _anga_ or inflective base; such as lengthening, as in _rajan_, 'a king,' I. p. _rajanah_ 'kings.' But though it is inoperative as regards the _anga_, the elided affix is not altogether inactive. It retains the virtue of raising the base to the dignity of a _pada_. Thus:- पंचन् + जस् = पंचन् + ०, (_luk_ (VII.1.22)). The word _panchan_ is now a _pada_, and as such, it drops its final न्.