---
sutra: येन विधिस्तदन्तस्य
vRtti: येन विशेषणेन विधिर्विधीयते सतदन्तस्यात्मान्तस्य समुदायस्य ग्राहको भवति स्वस्य च रूपस्य ॥
vRtti_eng: An injunction which is made with regard to a particular attribute, applies to words having that attribute at their end as well as to that attribute itself.
---
This _sutra_ consists of three words :- येन 'by what (attribute),' विधिः 'rule,' तदन्तस्य 'having that (attribute) at its end.'

This is a rule of interpretation. When a rule is made with regard to a particular attribute or letter, it means also words having those attributes or letters at their end. Thus there is a rule (III. 1. 97) declaring "let there be the affix यत् after the vowels." Here the phrase "after the vowels" means and includes "after the roots ending in vowels, as well as roots consisting of a single vowel." Thus चि + यत् = चेयम्. Therefore, this _sutra_ means that when a rule is laid down in this grammar with regard to a particular attribute, that rule, besides being applicable to that particular attribute, is also applicable to words ending in that particular attribute. Thus a rule laid down generally with regard to vowels, will apply to words ending in vowels; a rule laid down with regard to certain forms, will apply to words ending in those forms.

Thus the _sutra_ एरच् (III. 3. 56) 'after इ there is अच् 'declares that the affix _ach_ would come not only after इ, but after any expression that ends in इ. Thus इ + अच् = अयः, चि + अच् = चयः ॥

Vart:- The present rule, (called _tadanta_-_vidhi_) must not be applied to rules relating to compounds (_samasa_), and to _pratyayas_ (affixes). Thus _sutra _ (II. 1. 24), declares that a word in the accusative case is compounded with the words _srita_, _atita_ &c. As कष्टं + श्रितः = कष्टश्रितः 'involved in pain.' The present _sutra_ must not be applied here, and we cannot say that a word in the accusative case would be compounded with another that ends in _srita_; for _tadanta_-_vidhi_ does not apply here. Hence we cannot form a compound of कष्टं + परमश्रितः ॥

Similarly, in rules of affixes. Thus _sutra_ (IV. 1. 99) declares "that the words नड &c., take the affix फक्." Thus नड+ फक् = नाडायनः । But we cannot apply the affix _phak_ to the word सूत्रनड, the _tadanta_-_vidhi_ not being applicable here. The descendant of सूत्रनड will be called सोत्रनाडि and not as above.

The above _vartika_ is however qualified by the following:

Vart:- The above _vartika_ does not apply to words formed by affixes that have an indicatory उक् (उ, ॠ, लृ), short or long, or where a rule is propounded with regard to letters. Thus the affix _ktavatu_ (I. 1. 26) has an indicatory उ, and we have कृतवत्. A rule which will apply to _kritavat_ will apply also to the word which ends in _kritavat_. Thus the feminine of _kritavat_ is कृतवती (IV. 1. 6), the feminine of _sukritavat_ will be _sukritavati_. Similarly rule (IV. I. 95) अत इञ् says "after अ there is the affix इञ्." This is a rule relating to _pratyayas_, but as it is propounded by mere letters, the rule of _tadanta_-_vidhi_ will apply here. Thus दक्ष + इञ् = दाक्षि 'the son of _Daksha_.'

Vart:- When a term, which denotes a letter, is exhibited in a rule in the form of the locative case and qualifies something else which likewise stands in the locative case, that which is qualified by it must be regarded as beginning with the letter which is denoted by the term in question, and not as ending with it.

Thus _sutra_ (VI. 4. 77), _achi_ _snu_ _dhatu_ _bhruvam_ _yvor_ _iyan_ _uvanau_, means "_iyan_ and _uvan_ are the substitutes of what ends with the _pratyaya_ _snu_ and what ends in a verbal root in इ or उ, whether long or short, and of the inflective base _bhru_, when an affix beginning with a vowel follows." Here the word '_achi_' is exhibited in the seventh case, which literally means 'when a vowel follows;' but by virtue of the present _vartika_ it means, 'when an affix beginning with a vowel follows,' as, श्रियः, भ्रुवः ॥
