---
sutra: अव्ययीभावश्च
vRtti: अव्ययीभावसमासोऽव्ययसंज्ञो भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: (The compound called) _Avyayibhava_ (II. 1. 5) is also indeclinable.
---
The _Avyayibhava_ or adverbial or indeclinable compounds are formed by joining an indeclinable particle with another word. The resulting compound, in which the indeclinable particle forms generally the first element, is again indeclinable, and generally ends, like adverbs, in the ordinary terminations of the nominative or accusative neuter. Thus अधिहरि 'upon _Hari_,' अनुरूपं 'after the form i.,e., accordingly.'

The word च in the _sutra_ shows that here ends the definition of _avyaya_. The _avyayas_, therefore, are all those words which are comprised in the above five _sutras_.

What is the object gained by making the _avyayibhava_ compounds _avyayas_? Three objects are gained, by making these compounds, indeclinables, viz., we can apply to them (1) the rule relating to the elision (लुक्) of the case affixes and feminine affixes, i.e., _sutra_ (II. 4. 82) thus, in the following example, the words _upagni_ and _pratyagni_ though qualifying the word _salavah_, do not take the gender and number of the latter, उपाग्नि प्रत्यग्नि शलाभाः पतन्ति (2) the rule relating to accent when an _avyaya_ is compounded with the word _mukha_, (मुख स्वर), i.e., _sutras_ (VI. 2. 167) & (VI. 2. 168). Thus, उपाग्नि मु॑खः, here, sutra (VI. 2. 167), required the final vowel to take the _udatta_ accent, but the preceding word being an _avyaya_, _sutra_ (VI. 2. 168), intervened, and the first word retains its natural accent: (3) the rule relating to the change of _visarga_ : into स्, this change being technically called उपचारः thus उपपयःकारः, उपपयःकामः, as compared with अयस्कारः Here, the compound उपपयः being treated as _avyaya_ _sutra_ (VIII. 3. 46), applies and prevents the change of: into स्.

The four _sutras_ (I. 1. 38), (I. 1. 39), (I. 1. 40), and (I. 1. 41) have all been enunciated under the _svaradigana_. see _sutra_ (I. 1. 37). These _sutras_ properly, therefore, belong to the _ganapatha_; their repetition here in the _Ashtadhyayi_ indicates that these rules are अनित्य or not of universal application, viz., all rules relating to _avyayas_ in general, do not apply to them. Thus (II. 3. 69). declaring that the genitive case is not used along with an _avyaya_ is not a rule of universal application, for we see indeclinables like उदेतोः governed by the genitive case as, सूर्यस्योदेतोः; or क्रूरस्य विसृपः.
