---
sutra: विभाषा दिक्समासे बहुव्रीहौ
vRtti: दिशां समासो दिक्समासो दिगुपदिष्टे समासे बहुव्रीहौ विभाषा सर्वादीनि सर्वनाम संज्ञानि भवन्ति ॥
vRtti_eng: "The above words are optionally _sarvanama_ when they occur in a _bahuvrihi_ compound signifying direction (II. 2. 26.)"
---
This is an exception to _sutra_ (I. 1. 29) which follows. As a general rule (see _sutra_ (I. 1. 29)), in _bahuvrihi_ compounds, these words _sarva_ &c. are declined like ordinary nouns. The present _sutra_ declares an option to this, in special cases relating to compounds signifying direction. Thus the _bahuvrihi_ compound of direction उत्तरपूर्वा 'north-east' may form its dative case as a pronominal, e.g. उत्तरपूर्वस्यै or it may form its dative like ordinary words ending in आ, i. e. उत्तरपूर्वायै. So दक्षिणपूर्वस्यै or दक्षिणपूर्वायै.

Why do we say "when signifying a direction"? The next _sutra_ will enjoin that in _bahuvrihi_ compounds, these words are not treated as pronominals. Therefore, if in the present _sutra_, we had not used the word दिक्, it would have been impossible to know where there was option and where prohibition. By employing the word "direction," it is thus determined, that in a _samasa_, relating to direction (II. 2. 26), there is allowed option, while there is prohibition in all other kinds of _bahuvrihi_ compounds.

Why do we say "in compound"? So that the option may be in that _bahuvrihi_ which is purely _samasa_, and in no other _bahuvrihi_. There is no option allowed in that _bahuvrihi_ where there is a semblance of _bahuvrihi_ but not exact _bahuvrihi_.

The quasi-_bahuvrihi_, or analogical _bahuvrihi_ compounds, or to use the Sanskrit phrase, _bahuvrihi_-_vadbhava_, is taught in _sutra_ (VIII. 1. 9). where words in repetition are treated like _bahuvrihi_. Thus एकं + एकं = एकैकम् 'one and one, each one.' _Bahuvrihi_ compounds are possessive compounds, but in the above example, no idea of possession enters. However the compound here is treated like a _bahuvrihi_, for the purposes of the elision of the case-affix of the first member, and the whole compound gets the designation of _pratipadika_. In compounds like this, therefore, which are _bahuvrihi_-_vat_, but not exactly _bahuvrihi_, the present rule and the succeeding _sutra_ do not apply. Thus एकैकस्मै देहि 'give to each one,' दक्षिणदक्षिणस्यै देहि ॥

Why do we say "in the _bahuvrihi_"? So that there may be no option in the _dvandva_ compound. Thus दक्षिणोत्तरपूर्वाणाम् 'of the south, north and east.' The prohibition in the case of _dvandva_ by rule 31 is absolute and invariable.
