---
sutra: षष्ठी स्थानेयोगा
vRtti: इह शास्त्रे या षष्ठी अनियतयोगा श्रूयते सा स्थानेयोगैव भवति नान्ययोगा स्थानेयोगनिमित्तभूते सति सा प्रतिपत्तव्या ॥
vRtti_eng: The force of the genitive case in a _sutra_ is that of the phrase 'in the place of' when no special rules qualify the sense of the genitive.

---
This _sutra_ explains the mode of interpreting words used in the possessive case (sixth case) in the _sutras_ of _Panini_. The genitive case or _shashthi_ denotes many sorts of relations in Sanskrit, such as causation, possession, relation in place, comparison, nearness, proximity, change, collection, component member, &c. So that when a word is in the genitive case in a _sutra_ generally, the doubt may arise in what sense that genitive is to be used. This aphorism lays down the restrictive rule for the interpretation of such words. It says that the force of such genitive is to convey the meaning of 'in the place of.'

Thus in the _sutra_ (1.1.3), the word इक् is in the genitive case; the literal translation being :- "of _ik_ there is _guna_ and _vriddhi_." But "of" here means by virtue of the present rule of interpretation "in the place of." So that the _sutra_ means 'in the place of इक्.' Similarly in the _sutra_ immediately preceding this, viz. (1.1.48), we have the word एच् in the genitive case and the _sutra_ means 'of एच्.' Here also "of" means "in the place of."

Thus in _sutra_ हन्तेर्ज (6.4.36) 'of _hanti_, there is ज्' the word हन्ते, is the genitive of हन्ति; this genitive is used generally and its force is that of "in the place of." Therefore, ज् displaces the verb हन् in लोट् or imperative mood, and we have the जहि 'kill thou.'

This _sutra_ is also thus translated by Dr. Kielhorn :- Only that which is enunciated in a rule, i.e. that which is read in a rule or rather that which in the real language is like that which is read in a rule in a genitive case, or that which forms part of that which is enunciated in a genitive case, assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word स्थान 'place' i. e, is that in the place of which some thing else is substituted, but some thing suggested by the former does not assume that relation.

The word स्थान here is synonymous with प्रसङ्ग or 'occasion.' Thus in the sentence दर्भाणां स्थाने शरैः प्रस्तरितव्यम्, the word _sthane_, means 'prasange' i. e. wherever there is occasion to spread _darbha_ grass, spread there the _sara_ instead. Similarly in _sutras_ अस्तेर्भूः (2.4.52), or ब्रुवो वचिः (2.4.53), the words '_asti_,' and '_bru_' are in the genitive case, and mean, 'wherever there arises occasion to use the verbs अस् or ब्रू use there the verbs भू or वच् instead respectively.' Thus भविता, भवितुम्, भवितव्यम्, are the future, gerund, and passive participle respectively of अस्; so also, वक्ता, वक्तुम् and वक्तव्यम् are the same forms of ब्रू.  

The word स्थानेयोगा is a _bahuvrihi_ compound of two words, not in apposition, (_vyadhikarana_ _bahuvrihi_, see (2.2.248) (2.2.35)), and it qualifies the word _shashthi_. The compound means स्थाने योगोऽस्या, 'that which assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word _sthana_.' Consequently the seventh case-affix is not elided in this compound; on the analogy of compounds like कण्ठेकालः &c.