---
sutra: वृद्धिरादैच्
vRtti: वृद्धिशब्दः संज्ञात्वेन विधीयते प्रत्येकमादैचां वर्णानां सामान्येन तद्भावितानाम् अतद्भावितानां च।
vRtti_eng: आ, ऐ and औ are called vriddhi.
---
This defines the word vriddhi. The letters आ, ऐ and औ are vriddhi letters. The sutra consists of three words vriddhi, ât and aich. आत् means the long आ, the final त् being indicatory only, and is for the sake of the pratyâhâra aich, and the pratyâhâra ऐच् means the letters ऐ and औ. 

The indicatory त् in आत् serves the purpose of showing that the very form आ having two måtrâs or prosodial measure, is to be taken. This त् also joins with the succeeding vowels ऐ and औ by the rule of तपर (I. 1.70) or that "which precedes or succeeds त्" and indicates that these vowels must be taken as having two mâtrâs only, though they may be the result of the combination of vowels whose aggregate mâtrâs may be more than two. A short vowel has one måtrâ, a long vowel has two, and a consonant has half a mátrâ. Thus by a rule of arm or euphonic conjunction of letters आ+आ=आ, as महा + आशयः = महाशयः. Here हा has two mâtrâs and not four. So also in 35: the vowel ऐ the resultant of आ+ऐ has only two, not four, mâtrâs. 

Thus the initial vowels in the following secondary derivative nouns are vriddhi forms of their primitive vowels. आङ्गः "bodily", from अङ्गः; 'body' ऐच्छिकः "optional", from इच्छा "option"; ओपगवः "the son of Upagu", from the word उपगुः meaning "a sage called Upagu." Similarly in शालीयः "belonging to the house" the आ is radical, and is also called vriddhi. The word vriddhi occurs in sûtras like सिचि वृद्धिः परस्मैपदेषु (VII. 2. 1.) “Let the final इक् of the base get vriddhi substitute before the affix सिच् of the Parasmaipada". 
