---
sutra: एङ् प्राचां देशे
vRtti: एङ् यस्याचामादिस्तत्प्राग्देशाभिधाने वृद्ध संज्ञं भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: A word that has the letters ए and ओ as the first among its vowels, gets also the designation of _vriddham_, when it is the name of Eastern countries.

---
As गोनर्द is a country of the east, it is a _vriddham_ word and we have गोनर्द + छ् = गोनर्दीयः; similarly एणीपचनीयम्, भोजकटीयः.

The word _prak_ in the _sutra_ has been differently interpreted. The Grammarian _Kunin_ takes the word _prak_ as an epithet qualifying the word _acharya_, 'professor' understood. In that case the _sutra_ will be thus translated:- 'In the opinion of the Eastern (or ancient) professors, a word that has the letters e and o as the first among its vowels, and is the name of a country, is called _vriddham_.' Under this interpretation, this will be an optional rule only, giving the opinion of eastern or ancient grammarians.

Others however take the word _prak_ as qualifying the word _desa_ and the meaning then is as given in the text.

Why do we say 'having the letters ए and ओ'? If a simple vowel is first among the vowels, of a word, that word will not be called _vriddham_: and as such will not take the affix छ्; as आहिच्छत्रः, कान्यकुब्जः. 

Why do we say of 'Eastern country'? Because this rule does not apply to a word like देवदत्तः which is the name of a town in the _Punjab_, which is not an eastern country. Its secondary derivative will be दैवदत्तः, born in _Devadatta_.

Why do we say 'country'? The rule will not apply to rivers &c. Thus from गोमति we have गौमताः 'fish born in the river _Gomati_.'