---
sutra: तृतीयासमासे
vRtti: तृतीयासमासे सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति ॥
vRtti_eng: In Instrumental Determinative Compounds the words _sarva_ &c. are not _sarvanama_.
---
This is another exception to the definition of _sarvanama_. There is a class of compounds in Sanskrit_ called _tatpurusha_ compounds, in which the last word governs the preceding one. The word governed may be in any one of the six cases: when it is in the third or instrumental case, the compound is called _tritiya_ _tatpurusha_. When, therefore, there is such a _samasa_, the words mentioned in _sutra_ (I. 1. 26) are not to be declined like pronominals. Thus the word मासपूर्व is a compound of मास and पूर्व = मासेनपूर्व meaning 'prior by a month,' where the word _masa_ is in the instrumental case. This compound will be declined like ordinary words, e.g. its dative will be मासपूर्वाय, though the dative of पूर्व, when standing by itself, is पूर्वस्मै; so also संवत्सरपूर्वाय ॥

The _tritiya_-_samasa_ of the present _sutra_ has reference to the special _tritiya_-_samasa_ ordained by the particular _sutra_ (II. 1. 31). namely, "that which ends with the 3rd case affix, is compounded with the words _purva_, _sadrisa_, _sama_, &c." and has not reference to the _tritiya_-_samasa_ in general, such as one ordained by (II. 1. 32)," that which ends with the 3rd case-affix when it denotes the agent or the instrument is compounded diversely with what ends in a _krit_ affix." Therefore, in phrases त्वयका कृतं 'done by thee,' मयका कृतं 'done by me,' these words are treated as pronominals, though in the instrumental case followed by a word ending in a _krit_-affix. In other words, reading this _sutra_ with (II. 1. 31), we find that _purva_ is the only _sarvanama_ which is so compounded, and to which only the present _sutra_ would seem to apply.

The word समास may appear to have been mentioned redundantly, as it has already been mentioned in the previous _sutra_, the primary object of the _sutra_ authors being to shorten the rules by the keeping out of every unnecessary word. But here, the word समास has been repeated, to show that even in phrases like मासेन पूर्वाय, though not a compound, but used in construction with an instrumental case, the word पूर्व is not a _sarvanama_, that is to say, the prohibition extends even to phrases, which bear the sense of the instrumental compound, though not exhibited in the form of the instrumental compound.
