---
sutra: मुखनासिकावचनोऽनुनासिकः
vRtti: मुखसहिता नासिका मुखनासिका, तया य उच्चार्यते वर्णः सोऽनुनासिकसंज्ञो भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: "That which is pronounced by the nose along with the mouth is called _Anunåsika_ or nasal."
---
This defines the word _anunåsika_. The _sûtra_ consists of four words मुख "mouth" नासिका "nose" वचनः "utterance or pronunciation" and अनुनासिकः "nasals." Though the words मुख + नासिका (II.4.2) will by the rule of composition form मुखनासिकं and not मुखनासिका, yet the latter form might be held to be an irregularity; or the phrase मुखनासिकावचनं may be regarded as a compound of मुखनासिक+आवचनं, the word _avachana_ meaning "partial utterance." That is a letter partially uttered by the nose and partially by the mouth would be called _anunåsika_. Therefore the nasals are those letters which are pronounced from two organs or places, i.e., the mouth and the nose. The pure nasal is _anusvåra_, while _anunasikas_ are different from this, in as much as, that in pronouncing these, the breath passes through the nose and the mouth.

The vowels are generally so nasalised. 'If, instead of emitting the vowel sound freely through the mouth, we allow the velum pendulum to drop and the air to vibrate through the cavities which connect the nose with the pharynx, we hear the nasal vowels (_anunåsika_).' Thus अँ, आँ. In the Vedas, the particle आङ् is _anunåsika_. As अभ्र आँ अपः (_Rig_ _Veda_. V.48.1), so also पर्षि॑ दी॒ने ग॑भी॒र आँ उग्र॑पुत्रे॒ (_Rig_ _Ved_. VIII. 67. 11).

The consonants ङ, ञ, ण, न and म are also _anunåsika_. Thus ङ is pronounced by the throat along with the nose, ञ by the palate and nose, ण by the upper palate and nose; न by the teeth and nose, and म by the lip and nose.

The semi-vowels य, न and ल are also nasalised and are then called _anunåsika_. The term _anunåsika_ is used in _sūtra_ (V.1.126) &c.

Why have we used the word "by the mouth"? This definition will not include _anusvåra_ or the pure nasal, which is pronounced wholly through the nose. Why have we used the word "by the nose"? In order to exclude the consonants क, च, ट, त, प &c. &c., which are pronounced wholly and solely through the mouth.
