---
sutra: तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं सवर्णम्
vRtti: तुल्य आस्ये प्रयत्नो यस्य वर्णस्य येन वर्णेन सह स समानजातीयं प्रति सवर्णसंज्ञो भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: Those whose place of utterance and effort are equal are called _savarna_ or homogeneous letters.

---
This defines the word _savarna_ or a homogeneous letter. The _sūtra_ consists of four words :- तुल्य "equal or similar," आस्य "mouth or place of pronunciation," प्रयत्न "effort" and सवर्णम् "words of the same class."

The आस्य or places or portions of the mouth by contact with which various sounds are formed are chiefly the following :- 1. कण्ठ "throat" 2. तालु 'palate,' 3. मूर्द्धा, 'head,' 4. दन्ताः 'teeth,' 5. ओष्ठौ 'lips,' 6. नासिका 'nose.'

The प्रयत्नम् or quality or effort is of two sorts primarily, आभ्यन्तरः "internal" and बाह्यः "external." The first is again sub-divided into five parts:-

1. स्पृष्टम् or complete contact of the organs. The twenty-five letters from क to म belong to this class. In pronouncing these there is a complete contact of the root of the tongue with the various places, such as throat, palate, dome of the palate, teeth and lip.

2. ईषत्स्पृष्टम् or slight contact. The letters य, र, ल, व belong to this class of contacts. "In pronouncing these semi-vowels the two organs, the active and passive, which are necessary for the production of all consonantal noises, are not allowed to touch each other, but only to approach."

3. विवृतम् or complete opening. The vowels belong to this class.

4. ईषद् विवृतम् or slight opening. The letters श, ष, स, ह belong to this class. Some however place the vowels and श &c., into one group and call them all _vivrita_.

5. संवृतम् or contracted. In actual use, the organ in the enunciation of the short अ is contracted but it is considered to be open only, as in the case of the other vowels, when the vowel अ is in the state of taking part in some operation of grammar.

The _abhyantara_ _prayatna_ is the mode of articulation preparatory to the utterance of the sound, the _båhya_-_prayatna_ is the mode of articulation at the close of the utterance of the sound.

The division of letters according to _abhyantra_ _prayatna_ has been already given. By that we get, 1. the _sparsa_ or mute letters, 2. the _antastha_ or intermediate between _sparsas_ and _ushmans_, or semi-vowel or liquid letters, 3. the _svaras_ or vowels or _vivrita_ letters, 4. the _ushmans_ or sibilants or flatus letters.

The division of letters according to _båhya_ _prayatna_ gives us first surds or _aghosha_ letters, 2. sonants or _ghosha_ letters. The _aghosha_ are also called _svasa_ letters, the _ghoshas_ are called _nåda_ letters.

The second division of letters according to _båhya_ _prayatna_ is into;

1. Aspirated (_mahåprana_). 2. Unaspirated (_alpaprana_).

The vowel अ has eighteen forms. The acute अ (_udatta_), grave अ (_anudatta_) and circumflexed अ ( _svarita_). Each one of these three may be nasalised (_anunasika_), or not (_niranunasika_).

Then lastly everyone of these six may be short, long, or prolated. Thus:- अ, अ॒, अ॑, अँ, अँ॒, अँ॑, आ, आ॒, आ॑, आँ, आँ॒, आँ॑, अ३, अ॒३, अ॑३, अँ३, अँ॒३, अँ॑३.

Similarly the letters इ, उ and ऋ have also eighteen forms. The letter ऌ has no long form; it has therefore 12 modifications. The diphthongs have no short forms, they have therefore, only 12 forms. The _antastha_ or semi-vowels with the exception of र have two forms each vis., nasalised and un-nasalised. The semi-vowels have no homogeneous letters corresponding to them. All letters of a _varga_ or 'class' are homogeneous to each other.

Thus then the homogeneous or _savarna_ letters must satisfy two conditions before they could be called _savarna_. First, their place of pronunciation or आस्य must be the same. Secondly their प्रयत्न or quality must be equal. If one condition be present and the other be absent, there can be no _savarna_-hood. Thus च and श are both palatals, their आस्य or place of pronunciation being तालु 'palate', but still they are not _savarna_, because their प्रयत्न is different, the प्रयत्न of च being _sprishta_ and that of श being _vivrita_.

Similarly क and च though their प्रयत्न is the same i.e., _sprishta_, yet their आस्य being different, one being guttural and the other palatal, are not _savarna_.

There is exception to this rule in the case of ऋ and ऌ, which though having different आस्य are still called _savarna_ by virtue of the _varttika_ of _Katyayana_; "the homogeneousness of ऋ and ऌ , one with another, should be stated." Thus होतृ+ऌकारः = होतॄकारः ; here ऋ and ऌ have coalesced into long ॠ by rules of _sandhi_, on the assumption that they are _savarna_ letters.

The word _savarna_ occurs in _sůtras_ like अकः सवर्णे दीर्घः (VI.1.101).

Why do we say "the place of pronunciation"? So that there may not be homogeneous relationship between कचटत and प whose _prayatna_ is the same but whose _åsya_ is different. What is the harm if we make them _savarna_? Then in words like तर्प्ता and तर्प्तुम्, the प would be elided, if it be held homogeneous with त, by (VIII.4.65), "there is optional elision of झर्, preceded by a consonant, when a homogeneous झर् follows."

Why do we say "effort"? That there may be no homogeneity between इ and the palatals, and य and श, whose organ of pronunciation is the same, but whose _prayatna_ is different. What harm if it be so ? Then in अरुश्च्योतति, the श would be elided before च by the rule already referred to, (VIII.4.65).