---
sutra: अनेकाल् शित्सर्वस्य
vRtti: अनेकाल् य आदेशः शिच्च सर्वस्य षष्ठी निर्दिष्टस्य स्थाने भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: A substitute consisting of more than one letter, and a substitute having an indicatory श take the place of the whole of the original expression exhibited in the sixth case.

---
This _sutra _ is an exception to _sutra_ (1.1.52) by which it was declared that an _adesa_ or substitute replaces only the last letter. This _sutra_ on the contrary enjoins that an _adesa_ consisting of more than one letter replaces the whole expression in the genitive case, and not only its last letter. Even where an _adesa_ consists of a single letter, but if it has a श् as its indicatory letter, it replaces the whole word.

Thus, there is a _sutra_ ब्रुवो वचिः (2.4.53) which means 'in the place of ब्रू let there be वच्. Here the _adesa_ वच् consists of three letters (more than one), and therefore, it replaces the whole word ब्रू and not only the last letter ऊ. That is to say in forming certain tenses the verb ब्रू is replaced by वच्. Thus the future tense of ब्रू is वक्ता 'he will speak.' 

So also there is a _sutra_ (5.3.3.) by which it is declared:-- "In the place of इदम् there is इश्." Here the _adesa_ इ is an _adesa_ having the श् for its indicatory letter, and though it consists of only one letter, it replaces the whole word इदम्, and not only its last letter म्.

Of course, it must be understood that the phrase 'consisting of more than one letter' applies to the actual substitute, and not to the substitute with its indicatory letters, the latter being for the purposes of counting regarded as mere surplusages and not to be taken into account. To see whether an affix is अनेकाल् or not, the indicatory letters must not be counted; and the affix must be stripped of all its इत् letters.