---
sutra: आने मुक्
vRtti: आने परतोङ्गस्यातो मुगागमो भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: Before the Participial ending आन, a verbal stem ending in short अ, gets the augment मुक् ॥

---
Thus पचमानः, यचमानः ॥

This मुक् is part and parcel of अ only, and not of the _anga_. For if मुक् be considered as part of the _anga_, then it will be an intervention, and make the _anga_ end in a consonant and so there will be anomaly in accent. For by (VI.1.186), the ल _sarvadhatuka_ affix is _anudatta_ after a stem ending in अ; so if मुक् be considered part of the _anga_, the stem no longer ends in अ but म्; but if it be considered as a portion of अ only, then the _anga_ still remains अदुपदेश (VI.1.186). So the accent of पचमानः and यजमानः is governed by (VI. I. 186).

An objector may say, "if this be so, then the stem पचम् is still considered as ending in अ, and therefore in पचम् + आन, we should apply the previous _sutra_ (VII.2.81), and change अ into इय्" ॥ To this we reply, 'no, it cannot be so; for the त् in अत् (VII.2.80) shows that the अ consisting of one _matra_ is to be taken, but when मुक्  is added, this अ becomes one _matra_ and half, so the rule (VII.2.81) will not apply; because it applies only to अ of one _matra_'. The objector:- "If this is so, then the _anudatta_ of (VI. I. 186) will not also hold good, for there also the अत् means the अ of one _matra_." This is no valid objection. For there the word उपदेश is taken, so that a stem which at the time of _upadesa_ or first enunciation, ends in a short अ of one _matra_, is governed by that rule; though after the enunciation, the short अ may be lengthened in its _matra_. It is for this reason that the rule (VI.1.186) applies to पचावः and पचामः; though the short अ is subsequently lengthened before व and म by (VII.3.101).

Or the _sutra_ may have been made as आनस्य मुट्, and the augment म् would then be added to आन and not to the verbal stem. All the above difficulties would be removed by this view. But then the final अ of पच &c would require to be lengthened before मान by (VII.3.101). This objection, however, is not insuperable, for one view of (VII.3.101) is that the word तिङि is understood there, so that the lengthening would take place only before a तिङ् affix beginning with a यञ् vowel : and not before any other affix.