---
sutra: एकं बहुव्रीहिवत्
vRtti: एकमित्येतच्छब्दरूपं द्विरुक्तं बहुव्रीहिवद्भवति ॥
vRtti_eng: When एक is repeated, it is treated like a member a of _Bahuvrihi_ compound.

---
The making it a _Bahuvrihi_ is for the sake of eliding the case-affix, and treating the word as a masculine, even when it refers to a feminine. Thus ए꣡कैकमक्षरं पठति (not एकमेकम्), ए꣡कैकयाहुत्या जुहोति (not एकयैकया). The accent is regulated by (6.2.1). the case-affix is elided by (2.4.71), and masculinising by (6.3.34). This double word एकैक should not however be treated like a _Bahuvrihi_ for the purposes of the application of the following three rules, (1) The _sutra_ (1.1.29) by which pronouns are not declined as pronouns when members of a _Bahuvrihi_ compound. The word एकैक however is declined like a Pronoun, as एकैकस्मै ॥ For _sutra_ (1.1.29) applies to a compound which is really a _Bahuvrihi_, and not to a word-form which is treated like a _Bahuvrihi_. The repetition of the word _Bahuvrihi_ in that _sutra_, though its _anuvritti_ was understood from the preceding one; indicates this. (2) The application of the rule of accent. Thus by the following _sutra_, a word is repeated when a mental pain or affliction over something is expressed. Thus न न करोति, सुसुजागर्ति ॥ This double-word is treated like a _Bahuvrihi_, but not for the purposes of accent. For by (6.2.172) a _Bahuvrihi_ preceded by न or सु gets acute on the final, but not so नन or सुसु ॥ Here four rules of accent present themselves Ist (6.1.223) ordaining acute on the final, 2nd (6.2.1) the first member retaining its accent, 3rd (6.2.172) already mentioned, 4th (8.1.3) by which the second member becomes _anudatta_. The rule (6.2.1) however regulates the accent, in supersession of the other three. (3) The third rule which does not apply to this _Bahuvrihi_-_vat_ एकैक is the rule of _samasanta_ affixing. Thus ऋक् ॠक्, पूः पूः (doubled by (8.1.10)) do not get the _samasanta_ affix अ by (5.4.74).