---
sutra: ङ्याप्प्रातिपदिकात्
vRtti: अधिकारोऽयम् । यदित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्याम आपञ्चमाध्यायपरिसमाप्तेर्ङ्याप्प्रातिपदिकादित्येवं तद्वेदितव्यम् ॥
vRtti_eng: (From this point forward as far as the end of Book Fifth, whatever we shall treat of, should be understood to come), after what ends with the feminine affixes ङी, or आप् are, or after a Nominal stem.

---
This is an '_adhikara_' aphorism pure and simple. It simply consists of terms which other aphorisms, in order to complete their sense, are under the necessity of borrowing. In other words, this _sutra_ points out the base प्रकृति to which the affixes beginning with सु treated of in the next _sutra_, and ending with कप् (V.4.151), are to be applied.

The _sutra_ consists of three words. The term ङी is a common name for the three affixes ङीप्, ङीष्, and ङीन् ॥ The term आप्, is the common name for the three affixes टाप्, डाप् and चाप् ॥ These are feminine affixes and are taught from _sutra_ 4 to 65 of this chapter. The word प्रातिपदिक means 'a Nominal stem' and has been defined in _sutra_ (I.2.45), (I.2.46), i. e. that which is possessed of a meaning, not being a root or an affix; or what ends with a _Krit_ or a _Taddhita_ affix. The word ङ्याप् प्रातिपदिकात् is a _Samahara_-_dvandva_  or Collective aggregate of these three words.

Q. All affixes are placed after the base (See _Sutra_ (III.1.2)); the affixes treated of in the last Book were to be placed after the root ('_dhatu_'); the remaining affixes taught in Books Fourth and Fifth, will therefore, be placed after all such bases प्रकृति which are not roots (_dhatu_); and such bases remaining are  _pratipadika_ and feminine words. What is then the necessity of making this _sutra_, when these _pratipadika_ &c, are the only bases left to us to apply the affixes taught herein-after ?

A. To this we reply, the necessity of making this _sutra_ arose from the following considerations: that the word ङ्याप् प्रतिपदिकात् should qualify the words 'वृद्ध' 'अवृद्ध,' 'the letter अ,' 'अनुदात्तादि', and 'द्व्यच्,' wherever used in the following _sutras_. So that, where a rule says: "let such an affix be applied to a _Vriddha_ word," we must understand it to mean, "let such an affix be applied to a _Vriddha_ word which is a _pratipadika_, or which ends with '_ni_' or '_ap_'; and not to every _Vriddha_ word." The principal aphorism, besides the present, which regulates the application of _Taddhita_ affixes, is (IV.1.82), which declares:- "The _taddhita_ affixes, on the alternative of their being employed al all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in construction." Thus (IV.1.157) says;-- "The affix फिञ् is added, according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians, in the sense of 'descendant,' after a word which is entitled to the designation of _Vriddham_, provided it does not end with a _Gotra_ affix." Thus the idea, 'the son of _Amragupta_,' may be expressed either by the phrase 'आम्रगुप्तस्यापत्यम्'; or by adding the affix '_phin_' to the first of the word in construction, viz, '_amraguptasya_,' which is a _Vriddha_ word (1. 1. 73). But can we apply the affix '_phin_' to the first of the word in construction in the following, ज्ञानाम् ब्राह्मणानामपत्यम्'; because the word '_jnanam_' the genitive plural of '_jna_', is a _Vriddha_ word ? Certainly not, because the word '_pratipadikat_' must be read into this _sutra_ (IV. I. 157), and the affix '_phin_' should be added after that _Vriddha_ word which is in its crude-form also a _Vriddham_, and not that which becomes _Vriddham_ only in construction. Now the _pratipadika_ of '_jnanam_' is '_jna_', the latter is not a _vriddham_, therefore, the rule does not apply to it. So also the word '_jna_' is a _vriddham_ in its _pratipadika_ state; but in the following phrase, it loses its _vriddha_ nature; 'ज्ञयो र्ब्राह्मनोरपत्त्यम्' meaning 'the son of two wise _Brahman_ ladies'. Still the affix '_phin_' must be added to the word '_jnyor_', because its _pratipadika_ is a _vriddha_ word (2) Similarly the word 'अवृद्ध' (_sutra_ (IV. I. 160); 'the affix _phin_ is applied diversely to a non-_vriddha_ word, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians') must be qualified by the word '_pratipadika_'; otherwise it would lead to similar incongruous results as in the last aphorism. (3) Similarly the word अत् in _Sutra_ (IV.1.95) ('the affix इञ् is added after a word which ends in the letter अ') must be qualified by the word '_pratipadika_'; that is to say, the word in its crude-form must end in अ, and not necessarily when it is in construction. If it were not so; then the affix 'इञ्' will apply only to the word 'दक्षस्य' in 'दक्षस्यापत्त्यम्' but will not apply to the words 'दक्षयोः', or 'दक्षानाम्' in the phrases 'दक्षयोरपत्त्यम्' or 'दक्षानामपत्त्यम्' ॥ But the affix applies to all those three words.

(4). Similarly the word 'अनुदात्तादेः' in (IV.2.44), (the affix अञ् is added to a word which has the grave accent on its beginning), must be qualified by the word _pratipadika_. That is, the word in its crude form must have the grave accent on its initial, though in construction, it may or may not have grave accent. Otherwise, the affix 'इञ्' will apply to the words 'वाचः' and 'त्वचः' which in construction are _anudattadi_ as in 'वाचो विकारः' (VI.1.168); but which in their crude-forms (वाक्, त्वच्) are _udattadi_. And conversely, the affix 'अञ्,' will not apply to the word 'सर्वेषाम्' which in construction is _udattadi_, as, 'सर्वेषाम् विकारः,' but which in its crude-form is _anudattadi_.

(5). Similarly the word 'द्व्यचः' in (IV.4.7), (the affix 'ठन्' is employed after words consisting of two vowels, when the sense is that of crossing), must be qualified by the word _pratipadika_. That is, the word in its _pratipadika_ state must consist of two vowels, though in construction it may consist of more than two syllables. Otherwise, this affix will not apply to the word घटेन in the phrase 'घटेन तरति', while it will apply to the words 'वाचा' and 'त्वचा' in the phrases, 'वाचा तरति,' 'त्वचा तरति'. But this is undesirable.

Q Why have we employed the word '_ny_-_ap_' in the aphorism? Is not the word _pratipadika_ wide enough to include the words ending with the feminine affixes, by virtue of the _paribhasha_:-- "A _pratipadika_ denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude-form as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender" ?

A. Not so. The _paribhasha_ you quote applies to that case, where there is a rule, relating to an individual word-form, given in the _Sutra_ itself. In other words, "this _paribhasha_ is applicable when a word is employed in grammar which either denotes _pratipadikas_ generally (as the word '_pratipadika_' does in this _sutra_) or denotes a particular _pratipadika_, (such as the words युवा, खलति, पलित, वलिन, and जरति, in (II.1.67))." That is, in (II.1.67), the masculine form _yuva_, also includes the feminine : but not so every-where. Moreover the words, ङी, आप् have been employed in the _Sutra_, in order to make the _Taddhita_ affixes applicable to feminine words ending in long ई (ङी) or long आ (आप्). Thus the feminine of 'काल', and 'हरिण' is, 'काली', and 'हरिणी', the feminine of 'खट्वा' and 'माला' is 'खट्वा' and 'माला' । After these words we can apply the _Taddhita_ affix तरप् : as 'कालितरा', 'हरिणितरा', 'खट्वातरा', and 'मालातरा' ॥

Now, had we not used the word '_ny_-_ap_' in the _Sutra_, and wished to express the same idea as is done, say, by the word '_kalitara_,' we could not have got this form at all.

Q. The word काल takes ङीप् by (IV. I. 42); to which when तरप् is added, the vowel is shortened by (VI.3.43); and we shall get the form कालितरा ॥ Why do you then say that the _Taddhita_ affixes could not be applied, but for the words _ny_-_ap_?

A. To this we answer, that by the rule of _vipratishedha_, the _Taddhita_ would have debarred the feminine. Thus, when feminine alone is meant and not comparison, we shall have काली; and when comparison alone is meant and not feminine, we shall have कालतर; but when both feminine and comparison are meant, then would arise the difficulty; and according to the general maxim, the _Taddhita_ would have debarred the feminine. But by using the word _ny_-_ap_, it is shown that first the feminine affixes are to be added, and then the comparison making affixes.