---
sutra: अनुपसर्जनात्
vRtti: यदित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामोऽनुपसर्जनादित्येवं तद्वेदितव्यम् ॥
vRtti_eng: The following rules apply to a Nominal-stem which is not a subordinate term in a compound.
---
This is an _adhikara_ aphorism pure and simple, and has governing force upto (IV. 1. 77): and prohibits the application of affixes to '_upasarjanas_'. That is to say, whatever we shall treat of hereafter, is to be understood to apply to such terms only, which are not _upasarjana_ or a subordinate term in a compound. (1. 2. 43). Thus the next _sutra_ declares "the affix _nip_ is added in forming the feminine after what ends in short अ, if the affix with which it ends has an indicatory ट्, &c." Thus the word कुरुचर is formed by the affix ट (111.) 2. 16), and ends in अ. The feminine of this word will be formed by ङीप् as कुरुचरी, similarly मद्रचर—f मद्रचरी । But if these words being the last members of a compound, are treated as _upasarjana_ (1. 2. 43), then they will not take the affix ङीप् in the feminine. Now in a _Bahuvrihi_ compound, all the component members are _upasarjana_, (II. 2, 35); therefore, the feminine of such compounds will not take ङीप् ॥ Thus, बहुकुरुचरा or बहुमद्रचरा मधुरा ॥ Similarly (IV. 1. 63) says, "the affix ङीप् is added after words denoting _jati_" as, कुक्कुठी, शुकरी ॥ But where these words are _upasarjana_, '_nish_' will not be added : as, बहुकुक्कुटा बहुशूकरा मधुरा ॥

As a general rule, _tadanta_-_vidhi_ (I, 1, 72) does not apply to compounds; but the present _sutra_ indicates by implication that the _tadanta_-_vidhi_ applies to compounds for the purposes of the application of feminine affixes. For had it not been so, there would have been no necessity of making the present _sutra_ ; for a rule applicable to a simple word as such, would not have applied to it when it was part of a compound-- whether subordinate (_upasarjana_), or principal (_pradhana_). But the present _sutra_ indicates that the _tadanta_-_vidhi_ does apply, if the word does not become a subordinate member, but is regarded as the principal member, of a compound.

The feminine of कुम्भकार or नगरकार will be कुम्भकारी or नगरकारी, in as much as the second member here is _pradhana_ : the word '_kumbha_-_kara_' being formed by अण् (III, 2, 1), and thus making it possible to apply ङीप् by (IV. 1. 15). The affix अण् referred to in the next _sutra_ refers to the _krit_-affix अण् (III. 2. 1), as well as to the _Taddhita_ affix अण् ॥
