---
sutra: शेषे
vRtti: शेष इत्यधिकारोय । यानित ऊर्ध्वं प्रत्ययाननुक्रमिष्यामः, शेषेऽर्थे ते वेदितव्याः ॥
vRtti_eng: The affixes taught hereafter, have senses other than those mentioned above.

---
The suffixes that will be taught now have senses other than those already taught in the previous aphorisms. "Let a meaning, other than those of which 'progeny' (IV. 1 92) was the first mentioned, and the quadruple signification, the last, be called 'शेष or the remainder'-- and in that remainder of senses, too, let there be the affix अण् &c. Thus चाक्षुषं 'visible' viz. colour which is apprehended by 'vision' from चक्षुष्; श्रावणः 'audible' viz. sound, from श्रवण, औपनिषदः 'treated of in _Upanishad_' i. e. soul, दार्षदः from दृषदः, 'ground on a stone' i. e. flour of a fried corn, चातुरं 'ridden in by four person' viz. a cart; चातुर्दशम् 'who is seen on the fourteenth day of the moon' viz a goblin; औलूखलः 'pounded in a mortar' viz. barley: आश्वः 'drawn by horses' viz. a chariot." (Adapted from Dr. Ballantyne's _Laghukaumudi_).

The regulating influence of the expression शेषे "in the remainder" extends from this aphorism forward as far as (4.3.134). The affixes छ &c taught hereafter, do not come in the sense of 'progeny' &c, but they have, every one of them, all the senses of जात 'being born' (4.3.25), प्रोक्तः (4.3.101), आगतः (4.3.74) &c. निवासः (4.3.89), &c कृतः &c (4.3.38).

Thus स्रौघ्नः means "born in _Srughna_ (4.3.25), or done in _Srughna_, or bought in _Srughna_, or obtained in _Srughna_, or skillful in _Srughna_ (4.3.38), or abundant in _Srughna_ (4.3.39), or suited to _Srughna_ (4.3.41), or staying in _Srughna_ (4.3.53), or what has come from _Srughna_ (4.3.74) or which has its rise in _Srughna_ (4.3.83), a road leading to _Srughna_ (4.3.85) a messenger going to _Srughna_ (4.3.85), a gate facing _Srughna_ or from which men go out to _Srughna_ (4.3.86) a book relating to the History of _Srughna_ (4.3.87), an inhabitant of _Srughna_ (4.3.89), a person whose ancestral home is at _Srughna_ (4.3.90)"