---
sutra: चङि
vRtti: चङि परतोऽनभ्यासस्य धातोरवयवस्य प्रथमस्यैकाचो द्वितीयस्य वा यथायोगं द्वे भवतः ॥
vRtti_eng: Of a non-reduplicate root there is reduplication when the affix चङ् of the Aorist follows.
---
The reduplication is of the first or second syllable according as the root begins with a consonant or a vowel. Thus अपीपचत्, अपीपठत्, (VII. 4. 93) and (VII. 4. 94). So also आटिटत्, आशिशत्, आर्दिदत् ॥ These are aorists of the causative roots पाचि &c.

When the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative (ण्यन्त) verbs पच् &c is to be formed, as here, we should first elide the causative sign णि, then shorten the penultimate vowel, and then reduplicate. Then by (VII. 4. 93) the effect would be like as if सन् had followed, and this would not be prohibited by the short vowel being considered _sthanivat_. For rule (VII. 4. 93) says "Let the effect be as if सन् had followed, on the reduplicate, if followed by a light vowel, of an inflective base to which णि followed by चङ् is affixed; provided there is not the elision of any letter in the _pratyahara_ अक् occasioned by the affixing of णि ॥" One of the conditions for the application of this rule is that the reduplicate must be followed by a light vowel. We have said above that the long penultimate is to be shortened before चङ् ॥ Now arises the difficulty. Should this light vowel coming in the room of a heavy vowel be considered like the heavy vowel by the rule of _sthanivat_ _adesa_ (I. 1. 56), or not? It should not be considered so, for the reasons given in (I. 1. 57). For it was established there that the _sthanivadbhava_ will arise then only when some operation is to be done to a thing anterior to the non-substituted i. e. original vowel. Here no operation is to be applied to something anterior to such original (अनादिष्ट) vowel, but to a form consisting of such substituted (आदिष्ट) vowel. Therefore, the light vowel is not considered non-existent for the purposes of सन्वद्भाव ॥ If this order of operation is not followed, there would arise incongruities. The order must be this: Ist the elision of णि ( VI. 4. 51) 2nd the shortening of the penultimate (VII. 4. 4) 3rd the reduplication. If the reduplication take place first and the vowel be shortened, then the reduplication having taken place before the substitution of the vowel had taken place, such substitute will now be considered as _sthanivad_: the light vowel being considered as still heavy, will prevent the application of सन्वद्भाव ॥ The difficulty will be in the form of आशीशमत्, where the short is ordained after the णि ॥ If this be the order of operations, there will not be the reduplication of the second syllable टि in the word अटिटत् ? This is, however, done by (I. 1. 59). which see. 
