---
sutra: एकः पूर्वपरयोः
vRtti: आधिकारोयम् । ख्यत्यात्परस्येति प्रागेतस्मात्सूत्रादित उत्तरं यद्वक्ष्यामस्तत्र पूर्वस्य परस्य द्वयोरपि स्थाने एकादेशो भवतीत्येतद्वेदितव्यम् ॥
vRtti_eng: From here upto (VI. 1. 111) inclusive is always to be supplied the phrase 'for the preceding and the following one is substituted'.

---
This is an _adhikara_ _sutra_. In every _sutra_ upto (VI.1.112) (excluding the last), whatever we shall teach, there in the room of the two, namely, the preceding and the succeeding, it should be understood, that the substitution is one. These form the well known rules of _ekadesa_, one letter or form replacing two consecutive letters &c. Thus (VI.1.87) teaches 'There is _guna_ substitution, when अ or आ is followed by a vowel'. We must supply into that _sutra_ the phrase एकः पूर्वपरयोः i. e. one _guna_ is the substitute for the final अ or आ and the initial vowel. Thus खट्वा + इन्द्रः = खट्वेन्द्रः ॥ Here ए is the single substitute of the both preceding Ietter आ and the succeeding letter इ ॥ The words पूर्व पर show that the substitute operates simultaneously on both. Otherwise the substitute would have come in the place of one only or of each one separately. Thus in आद् गुणः (अचि) = "after अ or आ, there is _guna_, in a vowel". Here आत् is in this ablative, and by (I.1.67) the _guna_ operation would have taken place on the letter following it: so also अचि is in the Locative and by (I.1.66), the _guna_ operation would have taken place on the preceding; so it is not clear of what letter there should be _guna_ substitution, of the preceding or the succeeding. But the present rule shows it must operate on both simultaneously. The word एक 'single', shows that a separate or a different substitute does not operate: i. e. the substitute must be one, there should not be two separate substitutes one for each _sthani_, such as we find in the _sutra_ (VIII.2.42) (रदाभ्यां निष्ठातो नः, पूर्वस्य च दः "न is the substitute of the त of _nishtha_, after र् and द, and of the preceding द"). Here न् is taught as substitute both of त् and द्, and as एक is not used in the _sutra_, we get two न, as भिद् + त = भिन् + न = भिन्नः ॥ But this is not the case here. According to _Mahabhashya_ the word एक is redundant.