---
sutra: आर्द्धधातुके
vRtti: यदित ऊर्द्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामस्तदार्द्धधातुकेवेदितव्यम् ॥
vRtti_eng: The clause \"when the affix is _Ardhadhatuka_\" is understood in the following aphorisms up to aphorism 58 of this chapter.
---
Thus it will be taught in _sutra_ (2. 4. 42),' that वध् is the substitute of हन् when लिङ् follows.' The words 'when the affix is _ardhadhatuka_' must be read into the _sutra_ to complete the sense. The result will be that in the _ardhadhatuka_ लिङ् namely the आशीर्लिङ् or the Benedictive mood, हन् is replaced by वध्, but not so in the _Sarvadhatuka_ लिङ् i. e., the Potential mood (विधिलिङ्). Thus, Benedictive वध्यात् 'may he kill'; but Potential हन्यात् 'let him kill.'

The word आर्द्धधातुके is in the 7th case; the force of this case-affix here is not that given in (l. 1. 66). i. e., the _sutra_ does not mean 'when an _ardhadhatuka_ affix follows.' But the 7th case has the force of indicating the subject, the meaning of the _sutra_ being 'when the subject is an _ardhadhatuka_ affix.' The result of this explanation is, that the various substitutions enjoined hereafter should be made first, and then the respective affixes should be applied. Thus whenever we want to affix any _ardhadhatuka_-affix to अस् 'to be,' we must first substitute भू for it, and then take the proper _ardhadhatuka_-affix which would come with regard to भू. Thus we can apply यत to भू by rule (III. 1. 97) which says: 'after verbs ending in vowels यत is applied.' But this affix could never have been applied to अस् which ends in a consonant. Thus we have भव्यम्. So the substitution does not depend upon any particular affix, but _ardhadhatuka_-affixes as a class.
